We're talking about Shen, and I don't know exactly where you want to go, but just let me say something about him as a person.
Is he James?
James Shen is, I think, his real name is the one he's consistently used.
And how does he spell it?
S-H-I-N-N.
And actually, I probably have more detailed information.
I could probably figure out when he was born and so forth, if I could go.
I don't think that's what he said.
But the fact is that
When we encountered him in Oberlin in 1981, he was in his early 40s and had not yet been arrested.
He had been involved, like Blumberg, was later to be involved in entering libraries all across the country.
He spent a lot of time in libraries.
He had a finding list.
As a matter of fact, I have some of his finding lists with me.
and uh which he had compiled from from uh 80 bookman's weekly and from uh sales catalogs so trying to find what would be desirable what went for money and then he would simply go to libraries and he would look for those things and then if they were not in special collections but on the open shelves he would contrive to get them out to remove the marks ownership and to sell them and when when he was arrested at oakland he had been doing this for several years and had had major
thefts from UCLA and from Johns Hopkins and from Penn and from all across the country, everywhere in between, from his using St.
Louis as a base.
He had taken courses at the St.
Louis Botanical Gardens in bookbinding, so he fasted himself able to repair the damage that would be caused from removing marks of ownership.
And indeed, those that he couldn't be removed, he would simply stamp over them up.
uh with the reverend stamp of his own making uh withdrawn or something or stamp of yet another misleading stamp of some library that he knew to be defunct so he could he could pass these off as books that had them why do you think that you think fundamentally he was a thief who loved books or why would he pick books as something to steal i mean i go back to the quote and the piece i had in the times you know why why not something more liquid like that well i think that's where i should tell you a little bit about him because he when he was arrested there
uh i got involved spending an awful lot of time trying to find out who he was because though he was arrested and although immediately from the evidence that we had there which we found in his his room and his cards or we knew an awful lot about we knew that in fact this was a big big time thief but uh he immediately jumped bail disappeared we couldn't get the st louis police to stop him in st louis while he packed up all of his books
trunks and boxes of them and then something disappeared this was in the early 80s early 80s and you and you were in what capacity at overland um and you're doing what as director of libraries at overland so i knew nothing about the field or anything else and i i was trying to find out several things one is who was this guy and where was he what had he been doing where had he gone where did he get what libraries had been involved and how do you how do you cope with something like this so i got deeply involved in all those aspects antiquarian books antiquarian book sellers
read books librarians, all that sort of thing, which as a British historian and as an administrator I'd never really been involved in before.
He was ultimately re-arrested in Pennsylvania when a librarian saw a photograph that I had distributed and called me and we arranged for the FBI to stake him out and ultimately he was arrested, tried in Third Circuit, Federal Circuit Court in Philadelphia and sentenced to two consecutive ten-year
terms uh in in federal prison a hefty sentence because he had been guilty he'd been found guilty on other occasions of violating federal statutes so that's why what the charges were uh in the case of of the our prosecution it was for uh possession and transportation transportation uh which is the easiest thing to prove they don't have to prove that he stole them or how he did it but they just have to prove that he had which of course he couldn't deny um
In fact, his whole defense hinged on whether or not he had been, his civil rights had been, constitutional rights had been violated in his arrest.
In any event, he then went to prison, served with good, and with good behavior, got out at the end of a third of his terms.
In other words, he served three and a third years for each of the 210s, so he was out after six and two-thirds years.
So he's been out now for some time.
During that time, we maintained some minor contact because he had held out.
We tried to find out more information.
We wanted to know how he operated.
We wanted to know who he sold to.
We wanted to know how suspicious dealers had been when we thought they might have been a lot more suspicious.
They had been unloading, fencing his books in the trade for a number of years.
And our first suspicions were that dealers would not look too carefully.
I've since modified that view.
I think they were, but some of the, some of the trades he made were about a male, and some people didn't see him at all.
What was the quality of the stuff that he was doing?
Well, he was doing the kinds of things that, in the early 19th century, views, voyages and discoveries, flora, posthums, all sorts of things, that would have, that would have been standing up pretty well and not used very heavily in college and academic libraries.
and uh they would have marks of ownership that was a big thing getting the marks of ownership off if they were in clean shape they were pretty good and it was pre-1850 stuff for the most part so it was uh rag paper so it was standing up pretty well bindings were usually pretty good and he had made himself uh as it turns out in prison fairly knowledgeable about this i mean he had educated himself about about books and about the book trade and about libraries he didn't think librarians
had a clue as to how valuable the stuff was.
He couldn't believe it.
You just go in and walk out with it and sell it.
I mean, he assumed that if it was worth money, it would have taken better care of it.
So, as a matter of fact, he was coaxed to think he could write a security essay or something, maybe even talk to librarians about improving.
And this would be something we encouraged him to think he could do this because we wanted to keep contact with him so that perhaps he would be helpful in telling us information.
Yeah, sure.
Though that's never really worked out, we maintained sort of friendly terms.
I had always treated him with respect, even from the time we arrested him, and he himself is very mild-mannered and very polite, so we really hadn't had a problem.
And after he got out of prison, and I was going to speak at the Society of American Archivists meeting, which just happened to be meeting in St.
Louis, and they would ask me to give a talk on library and archival security,
since Shin because we had his arrest and and the notoriety of that case and a lot of other things led to a number of uh of uh reforms in the library and uh rare books area uh i mean and aquarium booksellers area we had had conferences we had guidelines we had we developed bam bam uh there were all these things that had been been created to help do a better job of combating crime and a lot of them had to do with uh with with Shin and we had a big
first national conference on library security was held at uh at overland i was one of the co-chairs uh sponsored by the by the rare books and manuscript section of of the acro and the uh the antiquarian booksellers association of america the abaa and we brought fbi and interpol and archivists and everybody together and we've begun to really get a little higher profile and
and helped boost sensitivity and awareness and sort of raising consciousness and raising standards.
And meanwhile, then, a security committee within the rare books and manuscripts section of the ALA's academic division began to develop these guidelines and give people advice on how to deal with these issues.
So Shen had provoked, or helped him provoked, because of his tremendous visibility, a lot of reforms.
And in fact, I always thought we should be very grateful to him.
Can I just interrupt?
Yeah.
Was there ever any value, any rough estimate of what he did?
Yeah, because we, but it's just like the Bloomberg thing where it's been terribly inflated.
The only way you can really put a value on those things is actually to try to sell them and see what they go for.
Right, exactly.
And we banded about three quarters of a million dollars, but it's really sort of hard to say.
And you never did figure out, you never nailed any of the people that he sold to?
Well,
I understood that he was probably being stuck on contract.
We did, in fact.
I don't think there was any evidence of that.
But he would see somebody writing a warrant list, and he would go out and try to get it, and then say, well, I happen to have that, you know.
But I don't think he was a hard gun for anyone.
It's not like taking Vermeer out of the Gardner Museum.
That's right.
Not quite the same thing.
Since he pled guilty without ever going to trial,
His defense was in a preliminary hearing where he tried to argue that the case against him was flawed because we had violated his constitutional rights.
That our search warrant wasn't proper or something.
And we were able to defend everything we did to the satisfaction of the judge.
So once that happened, then he pled guilty.
So several things didn't happen.
They never had to have a full count of what he did.
They didn't have to bring...
witnesses like that did the Blumberg case and had to make statements about how valuable this was, how important.
He simply threw in the towel.
So we didn't have that kind of information.
But at that point, he was regarded as the number one American book thief of all time because no one had apparently had sold so many books and had hit so many libraries.
And for that matter, without anybody really knowing
I mean, they had been hit, and they knew they had these losses that some of them would report.
Are you finding that one, by the way?
Many of them didn't actually know they'd been so.
Well, that gets into more of an aggression.
I just happened to see him in the library, got my suspicions up, had him arrested, and then one thing led to another.
And Phil left it after he'd been in hiding, and he wandered into a library because he couldn't stay away.
And they spotted me because they saw it.
I had circulated this picture.
I published it widely in all the libraries.
Now, why did you become so involved in this?
Oh, I just thought it was fascinating.
And it was a learning experience.
There was so much about it that I didn't know.
And we had so much evidence that we seized that indicated that he had been to a number of libraries.
And I would call them and say, you know.
Maybe nobody else is doing this.
You're doing this.
No, no.
It was just, it became, it became, as some people become obsessive about collecting books, I began to collect book thieves.
And that became my obsession.
So I, as a result, I have files, just tons of files on cases.
Just give it a little book, I can tell you right now.
Of cases.
So I've tended to collect information on any number of cases, even going back into time.
And became very knowledgeable about the whole subject historically as a phenomenon, and began even to be regarded as something of an expert in library security, even though I've never myself
made that claim.
I mean quite often enough people will bring me in because I haven't gathered so much information that I'm perhaps of some use in a conversation, but I don't think of myself as an expert.
But all this is by way of digression to say that when I went to St.
Louis then to talk about how much we had improved things since Shin, Shin is out on parole, and so I contrived to have him meet my plane at St.
Louis.
We wanted to meet someplace where we could talk and the airport
coffee shop seemed like a good place because he could see me get off the plane i mean you can see all around you know you're not going to be bugged i could see him and i'd have to work he's a big guy six foot three maybe he's a big guy and and i was by myself had you met him before this obviously i had tackling uh was um but um i was at some risk as well particularly my wife felt that this is foolhard because if he really
had a sense of revenge, this would be a good chance to pay me back for having just spent seven years in the pokey.
But, so we went in the pokey place, and we spent about three hours there, and talked, as you were able to talk to the public, I talked a lot, although it was very candid and so forth.
I knew more about him than anybody else, probably, except his family members knew, because I'd, you know, I'd poke through his papers and so forth, so I knew an awful lot about him.
Do you remember when you heard this was again, by the way?
This would have been in 87, I guess, when that conference was.
I think it was 87, yeah.
Well, 87 or 88, I forget now.
I'm a little out of here.
Let's go back and look.
But the, oh, I, I, I, here's to do that at the conference.
It's not much.
It's not a set that I had, certainly spent an awful lot of time.
I'm coming over here so I can pick you up.
Something's
This is a book, by the way, of showing one of his cutters.
And these are the kinds of files he would make from American book files, his current, just to show what things were going for.
And then he would go in the library with a handful of these and just see if they had them.
He was so unsophisticated that this was a symbol for pound.
And it would deploy instead of monetary.
But wait.
I had published a list of all the cards that we found, because there were hundreds of these cards, and so we wanted people to see what was he had, and I actually gave pictures of some of them.
These are the ones that he had with the notes about how they would have to be cleaned up.
Back inside cover has glue from pocket that I can't get off.
Maybe cover with a book plate.
Are there any other copies of this?
I don't think I have any other copies left, but I'll be glad to lend this to you.
I had become really quite... I knew not awful lot about him.
I knew his handwriting.
I knew lots about him as a person.
That also was evident evidence, by the way, at the Bloomberg trial.
The Schindlers.
Stephen had a copy of that.
He stole a copy of that from one of the libraries.
That's amazing.
I saw that.
He took that out.
I recognized that.
Well, so I knew a lot about him.
So we could talk, and I learned even more about him.
I feel very sympathetic to him.
He's a con man.
You do feel sympathetic.
Well, you can't help.
A lot of his colleagues would hang these guys from their toes, you know.
Well, yes, but see, these guys, I mean,
Both Blumberg and Shen are sympathetic characters.
The people that I got a passion for are the librarians and the scholars who steal, and they're much more likely to be a problem.
I mean, people like Shen are fairly easy to stop.
I mean, you can either spot them coming in or you can arrest them in the trade.
They ought to have been able to spot Blumberg a mile away.
They didn't.
They had him on Riverside and let him go, too.
It's the expert, and I don't want to describe this too carefully, because the way you print, some of your readers will know, and maybe people, in fact, you know, who come in here and who use the collection and manage to work a few manuscripts in their release when they leave, or people who pocket a rare book, or librarians who do this.
And I would say that of all the professions who steal books, that librarians are as
as likely to be guilty of theft as anyone else.
They are in a position to know the value of the books.
They cannot get the book, but they can change the records.
They know where it is.
They know whether or not it's been catalogued or not.
How about the case in Georgia, for instance?
Well, it's a good case of Skeets William in Georgia.
But the fact is that I would be much more concerned, and I'm much more passionate about that betrayal of trust,
And I see much more vulnerability.
And he even removed records.
Yeah, well, of course.
So this document never even existed.
That's right.
They don't even know the things that they've lost.
He gave some of his books to my alma mater, which happens to be the college he went to, he didn't graduate from, Davidson College.
And when they were reluctant to send it back, they said, just prove to us, Georgia, that you own this book.
Of course, Georgia couldn't even prove it.
I thought it was a little churlish of my alma mater.
What's the status on, Steve?
I don't know.
He was sentenced, but I don't know.
He was appealing.
But a lot of these people have mental problems.
I mean, after all, severe problems of morality and honesty tend to be a psychological problem, too.
I mean, it's sort of hard to separate them.
A certain Blumberg had superior problems.
Shen, on the other hand, is sympathetic because he was a bright kid in an unfortunate home, lost his father early.
His mother, I think, I don't know whether they divorced or what, but she remarried.
married a man who didn't get along with Shen.
Shen's a big kid for his age, and they sent him to prep school.
He kept running away.
He just felt, I guess, abandoned or something, whatever he was.
But he was very bright, and he always had a scheme going in, and he got into trouble about smarting himself.
He stole a credit card from somebody, and he used that credit card eight
He stole it.
The reason he sold it was, as he told me, he started selling magazines.
He had to do something for a living.
And he would have a scheme for trying to sell things.
And he would go into these big office flats, and he would just work the office.
And then somewhere along the line, it occurred to him that he knew when the Wall Street Journal came out, say, or something would come out.
that on the mailing sticker, it would not only give the name of the person, but when their subscription would expire.
He would go through, and all the people, he would know that information.
So he would pass himself off as a salesman, let's say the Wall Street Journal.
And he would go to so-and-so, your subscription is going to retire, and such and such, would you like to renew?
And they would say yes.
He said, well, very good.
He had a little phony receipt.
You'll just make your check out.
We'll get it done right now.
And so he would then just pocket the money.
By the time they discovered it, it would be longer.
And once it's time going into an office, there was a meeting or something, the office was empty.
And he just sort of wandered around and looked in drawers.
He told us.
Yes, found a credit card.
This was much earlier.
I forget what the card was, but it enabled him to fly.
He went to St.
Louis and he flew all over the country.
He wouldn't go to a motel.
He would just...
He'd fly, he'd sleep on the plane, he'd eat their plane food, and he'd get to the airport and he'd buy a ticket to somebody else.
He was crisscrossing the country, uh, and becoming very familiar with airports or something that would stand him in good later on.
And, um, he said, trouble with it, he went through Chicago one too many times.
He said, they probably figured out something was up, and they arrested him.
Then he tried to pass himself off as the, as the son of the guy whose credit card was.
I mean, he's, he's just, was just kind of, and he was laughing about all this.
I mean, how naive he was.
What he was showing was that it was always just sort of a game, you know, to outsmarting people.
But one thing led to another, and he was in and out of prison for scams like this, just minor theft.
Quite often it was a federal offense, and so he racked up some federal time.
When he was in, he would spend the whole time in the library reading.
He'd never finished high school, but he was always described as like a college professor, but he was very... He had a tremendous vocabulary, and typical of somebody who goes up
in a prison, he could spell words that he couldn't pronounce because he had never actually heard anybody use those words.
He could use the word, but he didn't know how to pronounce it because he'd never heard it spoken.
It's an interesting case.
But he was a tremendous reader.
His wife, Lola, said that he spent all the time reading.
And he was a very gentle person, never heard anybody.
And basically, they got into a similar scam with antiques,
Antiques led to antiquarian books, and then it certainly occurred to him that these books that everybody was paying big money for, hell, they were just all over the place in these libraries, if you find a way to liberate them.
And it was a way that seemed to be a nonviolent crime.
There was no particular love for books in his plan.
No, but a tremendous love for reading.
I think he was fascinated with that, and he became very interested in reading.
But as far as I know, he didn't keep books for himself.
He found them interesting, but he was mainly getting them so he could then fix them up and sell them.
And he recognized that other people valued him.
And he himself read a great deal.
But there was never anything in his story that suggested that he had a great love for books.
But it was a love of reading.
And, again, he was a sort of a gentle man.
He got out of prison.
The question is, would he, you know, what would he do next?
Of course, he was always a model prisoner.
He made himself so well-read.
He was dealing with a lot of other people in prison who were illiterate.
And so he became a kind of jailhouse lawyer.
In fact, he tried to defend himself in federal court, and fairly successful, because he knew the law.
He had boned up, and particularly in procedural questions, and he would help write briefs for prisoners.
So he would spend his time on a good state.
People would always do him favors.
He never had to lack anything.
It was like living in a country club in a federal prison.
And then, since he was well-behaved, he'd always get out early.
So he didn't seem to have any terrible grits.
I mean, if you get caught, well, you get caught.
wait, learn something, go out and start over again.
His wife, however, died.
He married what I think was a former hooker in St.
Louis.
She died several of either her children, and I think he had one natural child.
But her children all died, and there was a lot of violence involved in those cases.
In one case, an accident.
In another case, I think they were wiped out by a drug dealer who had
they'd gone against or something.
It was terrible, and so he'd come out of prison, and he said, well, you wanted to go straight because his daughter had grown up in Eden without really knowing him, and he wanted to spend some quality time.
And that was the only regret apparently he had had.
He had a job with an industrial security firm.
He had one of their personnel people, supervisor.
That's amazing.
Well, he would know.
I mean, he'd be perfect, and he'd be very good with personnel.
So I don't know how he's doing it.
He hasn't answered
I sent him a couple of the Blumberg clippings where Blumberg made references to it, or was refuted to have made a reference to it.
Well, in one case, it sounded like the guy wrote, inverted what he had said.
No, no, Stephen had a copy of that.
She must.
It was entered in evidence.
And there is evidence that he did say once.
He wanted to go down as the biggest, yeah, he wanted to be even better than shit.
But the question is whether Stephen actually said that or whether that was rude.
Yeah.
Because then I would be suspicious of anything.
Well, this is all over when I'm, I mean, when my book is all done.
I wouldn't have to let you listen to the seven hours of tape with Stephen.
Is that something you'd like to do?
I might want to do that.
They had invited me to, you know, come out and talk to him.
You weren't talking to me, but basically I really wanted to leave initiative with him because
I had nothing to gain and a lot to lose by this.
As a matter of fact, my main interest at one point was, again, trying to get him to be more forthcoming about how he got into Harvard, how he got into some places, because they wouldn't attempt to prove that, but it would be useful to know.
And so I was trying to hold out some way in which he could be helpful.
He's kind of hoping that there's part of the seducing deal, that in return for whatever,
Well, I think so, because they still want to know how the books go.
But he's willing to help them with that and also to serve as some kind of a consultant to tell them how he did it.
Yeah, well, if he could have done that beforehand, but I don't think that's going to help him much.
I don't think they're going to make it that conditional.
Because he won't be able to prove that he can do it.
If he had done it before sentencing, as an act of good faith, then I think they'd more like to do it.
But I think they've blown that opportunity by not doing it before sentencing.
I don't think the judge is going to say, now, we'll let you off so much if you do these things.
I don't think the judge is going to.
I think it's a major miscalculation.
Tell me, with all this Shin's background, he was living in St.
Louis?
Right.
Let's come up to Bloomberg now.
With that as prolonged, do you see the Bloomberg case as the great example of the real kleptomania in the American 20th century?
I really...
I really do, because statistically, there's been no one who has stolen more books from more libraries than Blumberg.
There have been some who have stolen, who have been much more high profile.
I mean, Charles Merrill Mount, stealing books from the National Archives, and there are a whole series of people we could cite who worked their scams at Yale, or the National Archives Library of Congress, some big time operators.
But the quantity and the number of things they stole were really quite insignificant in terms of this pile that Steve and John.
Now, there are some other people who were Cleptomaniac who liked this character over at, I think this was also Riverside, several years ago, who simply took library books out of all types and he simply filled his room, his house, his garage, and so forth.
He was a nut.
And when it was obvious that they were coming after him, his mother,
contrived to have a truck loaded up and take him and drop him to the landfill to try to destroy the evidence.
And so thousands of books, at least 10,000 volumes, were plowed into a landfill before the bulldozer operated notice.
So something different.
These were all library books.
But again, this was anything he came up with.
He was just an indiscriminate collector.
He was an accumulator.
He was an accumulator, and he was a true kleptomanic.
I mean, Stephen, obviously, was much more ambitious.
He had a focus.
He really had a focus, and he also got out a lot more places.
I mean, this became a tremendous... He had a scheme, I mean, in terms of plan.
Yeah, there are some other people who, in all-time history, I guess with Reinberger, and I think Count Libre would be the case, a Frenchman in the French Academy in the 19th century,
who stole huge quantities of fine libraries, chunks of them.
L-I-B-R-I.
L-I-B-R-I, yeah.
And the Libri Affair is well written up.
They're a lot of books and articles about Libri.
So there are some notable cases.
And there's some notable individuals.
I mean, there were a couple of popes who were, the famous story about the stolen book falling out from one reason.
And this quote, I mean, after a while, they wouldn't even let them go in the room.
I mean, it's the pope.
They want to be alone with the books.
They want me still.
I'm going to have that story.
Yeah, that's a great story.
But the set of, you know, I wouldn't put him into, you know, but of his type.
And in America, I think that's true.
As far as we know, nobody has stolen as many things from as many places.
And with the added, the fact that there was such a focus,
And also clearly somebody who was not doing it for money, as far as we can tell.
Very clearly.
No question about it.
And there's where the completely different person.
Shen wouldn't have cared about any of these things.
I mean, it was purely things to be gotten rid of.
His father told me.
I mean, he gets a $72,000 annual trust.
I had no idea it was so huge.
$72,000 each year.
And his father disperses it to him.
And the guy lives.
I mean, like a homeless, he goes, and when he needs clothes, he goes to a Goodwill thing.
What's he doing with all the money?
He gives it away or he spends it.
God knows.
I don't know what he does with it.
He gives money away to homeless.
He does.
When he took me out on his drive that day, we first went to see some homeless people.
You were nervous going into the airport?
Because all they allege that he stole are the books.
Yeah.
There's nothing about... I mean, I got a call from a guy in Toronto who collects 78 RPM records.
They interviewed me in the Toronto Globe and Mail last week.
He says, he'd like to buy the records.
I said, well, you know... He said, well, they're stolen.
I said, no, they're his, and they remain his, and they're in his warehouse.
Well, he's going to go up.
I said, he's paid the lease on the warehouse probably for the next two or three years.
This thing remains his.
Fascinating.
50,000 doorknobs.
Well, I guess my thing about...
It was interesting.
Roger started, you know, discovered, seems to have almost discovered theft in this case, and was highly indignant that this creep should be allowed to walk.
I mean, he should clearly be garroted.
And I kept thinking, you know, Roger, would you say the same thing about all those Harvard graduates who have stolen Widener blind in the past few years?
I mean, several of them have been arrested.
He's told me about them.
One they call the French thief, the other they call the English thief.
Luther, Ross, yeah.
And they've taken books, you know, in French.
And either graduates, professors, or teaching assistants, or whatever.
Well, I mean, let's get real about, you know, those kind of people.
Instead of, Bloomberg is bad enough, but in most cases...
I think the real danger is much closer at hand.
Those are what I'm really concerned about.
Bloomberg is, as I said on National Public Radio, when I first heard about him, a tragic, sort of a tragic figure.
I mean, here's somebody who clearly... You don't have to be terribly knowledgeable about psychology to see if there's some real problems here.
And it's a... You can't just see it in a vengeful way.
He says, this is a person who's bad.
It's the privileged people who steal, who know better, who don't have to do it.
I'm much more concerned about it.
To go back to an earlier quote, you said you have become a collector of book thefts.
Yeah, and of stories of book theft, yeah.
When I was admitted to the Golier Club, and one of the first things they asked you there, you know, what do you collect?
And I was thinking of the things in which I've had a modest collecting interest over the years.
And because I'm a librarian, I may collect and then dispose of the library and then collect something else.
So my focuses have changed, particularly as I've moved from English history to other things in my career.
But the thing that was most uppermost in my mind is that I collect books, and I've got
The drawers are full of files of cases of book theft.
People write me about what's happened and want to know if I've got any reaction to it.
Sometimes I'm able to say, well, yes, that's very much like such and such a thing.
Or, you know, have you gotten in touch with so and so?
So I've become sort of a clearinghouse on book theft.
What fascinates you?
Is it the fact that they're stealing books or the motivation?
I mean, is it what motivates these people to be bibliocleptomaniacs?
I wish I could tell you that's true, but no, because it seems to me that Johnny Jenkins was right some years ago when he defined the different types of book thieves that there were.
I think there are just a few basic types, and almost everybody seems to be a variation of that.
And frankly, I haven't seen any new cases.
Even Bloomberg is not new in a way.
It's just going to be one of the best developed examples.
The same thing is true of Shin.
I don't expect to find new motivations.
I see them as just different examples of the same garden varieties, but my interest has all along been in what can I know that will help me to help libraries reduce their vulnerability to theft.
What is it that these incidences tell us about
What a library is not doing right, or what can it overcome?
And in many cases, there are poor procedures.
Libraries in the past quite often didn't take precautions about taking books that were very valuable, little use, and put them in special collections.
Things had appreciated in value over a period of time, and they hadn't bothered to call these.
Some people simply didn't see the value of strong ID practices.
where it's pretty clear from the evidence that they lost control of the contents of their stacks.
This is true at Harvard, where it's very difficult to keep people from going in because people manage to flash different credentials and then get into the stacks and then steal things.
In fact, what we propose at Harvard they do is to institute a fairly fundamental ID policy so that people have to show that they are who they are in order to gain access to the stacks.
and not simply have the door, you know, thing open like a sieve.
That's right.
So what I have, what my interest, I think, has been as a professional librarian learning from these accounts in order to simply do a better job as a librarian.
So I'm afraid it's a very prosaic interest, and it's not compulsive or exciting or sexy.
Does any of the Arcania interest you, like people who were killed for books or have been killed for books?
You know, that case that Rosenbach discusses in Books and Bitters, was it the Spanish fellow that killed many people?
Well, it doesn't seem to be terribly common.
It's only happened that once.
It's an aberration, and therefore it's sort of hard to get interested in that facet because you don't see too many examples of it.
If we had a rash of those, I think we might get interested.
I've tried to, I mean, all of my interest reflects practical questions of a person in charge of major repository books, such as what is the nature of your vulnerability?
Are you more vulnerable to a certain type of person?
Are you more vulnerable to the visitor?
Is that what you have to worry about?
My studies have
They may believe you have to be more concerned about your own staff because you're much more vulnerable within your own staff in a rare books library.
We may not have very many actual thefts, but I mean, we're clearly much more vulnerable from inside than we are to people from the outside.
Just one is a major loss.
Glover couldn't even get in the door.
I mean, he tried to get in, couldn't get in.
He didn't hit here.
He couldn't get in.
He didn't get an AAS.
Couldn't get in.
And Harvard, of course, he's right, but he'd never get in the Houghton.
You know, I mean, he... Oh, no, he wouldn't.
There's no way I could get in the Houghton.
That's what I'm saying.
I mean... But I think it's fascinating he could get into Widener Stacks, which is loaded with stuff anyway.
Darkness he could get into.
You know, it's amazing that you could get into Harvard Stacks.
When I was a young instructor teaching in Boston, I couldn't get into Harvard Stacks because it wasn't even open to undergraduates.
They've opened it up, and now they can't.
Now it's, you know, like a sieve.
But it's the practical lessons that I learned from it that I find interesting.
Were you, just a little biographical background, where you formed a lot of the library?
I was born a North Carolinian and went to, as it turned out, to college and graduate school at Duke.
All I went to Davidson to Duke as a graduate student, and I've always been a library-based person.
I basically got a PhD in history and taught at college, university for years before I made a transition to the library.
In my line of work, in teaching, you'd use the library so much and use it with your classes so much that the interaction was so great.
I was constantly interfering with librarians telling them how to run their business.
They'd say, if you think you'd use this one, you ought to run one yourself.
You know, I made that transition.
I was in Boston teaching at UMass Boston.
In my spare time, I got a library degree and decided to make the switch to a full-time librarianship.
We had built a library from scratch at UMass Boston.
Did you know Victor Burch at all?
No.
Over at Brandeis?
Interesting guy.
When you finish, I'll give you that.
Well, Walter Grossman, who had been an hour and came up and built the UMass library, and I was
a colleague of his.
So I became fascinated, and so I made that transition.
My first job in the library, early 1970s, my first job in the library, a paying job at least, was as a director.
I didn't work my way from the ranks.
And from, you know?
From there to SUNY, the College of Potsdam, and from there to Torblin.
And how long did you have been here?
It was about 11 years.
And you came here in last year?
And, of course, it's great because I'm back now in where my doctorate and my master's in British history really is centered.
As a matter of fact, these pictures, this is one of my collections, these are Gilways, reflect a bunch of politicians whose papers happen to be here.
And just a lot of the things that I worked with when I was a graduate student, in fact, are based here.
marvelous uh library for english history it's a dream job isn't it well sometimes it's a nightmare i mean it it's been allowed to slide for a long time and uh and there's just a lot to do to turn it around and it's not and everything costs money and in what aspect you mean in just administration or acquisitions now acquisitions are kind of quiet aren't they everything you can think about there's no money staff is not paid
Which is hard to understand.
Now, why is that?
I mean, Mr. Huntington didn't look... Well, he could look 30 or 40 years down the road, but he couldn't look 75.
Trustees didn't continue to see the importance of building up the endowment, but they just sort of thought it would be okay.
The place was so well-heeled that outsiders think, why would I give money to the Huntington?
It obviously hasn't.
The Getty's going to have the same problem unless they can... You think so?
Oh, sure.
I mean, Mel told us last year they've got to list several billion dollars.
Mel also will tell you that they don't have all the money they need and that they're right away, they're developing a development office so that they can not just spend, but in fact raise money for certain... They are kind of the main event right now in terms of who's buying them, aren't they?
Well, in that field, yeah.
In that field, particularly in art, yeah.
But only illuminated manuscripts or artist manuscripts.
They've got a very tight focus.
which is smart.
Well, but I will tell you that they're going to make sure, some of their trustees are our trustees, and they're going to make sure the same thing doesn't happen to them.
Basically, the endowment won't pay all the operating expenses, and they've not built it up fast enough, and the cost of simply doing business run far ahead of the revenues.
And meanwhile, the library is sort of now
slow to a walk.
We don't buy it as much as we like.
If we bought, we don't have a building to put it into because the building is full.
The addition has been deferred and deferred and deferred.
The places are beginning to look a little tatty and dingy and old-fashioned, so it's not as apt to attract younger people.
There's not enough room to bring readers from the outside, so it tends to be rather stuffy.
There's no automation.
The collection is rich as it is.
much of it is uh is fully catalogued because the early cataloging was all done as a rare books collection not for not for scholars and so you don't have nearly the kind of detailed catalog uh and you can't convert it to an online catalog because there's there's no data to search i didn't even notice that so but you're not computerized no we're just just beginning and so there's loads of things to do so to build up the staff build up uh
You've got to fill up its salaries if you're going to get a better stamp, if you're going to fill in the blanks.
I mean, if Alan Judsy would leave, Alan's terribly unabated.
He's a brilliant guy.
And if he would leave, I don't know how we'd replace him.
We certainly couldn't replace him at his salary.
A lot of people stay out of tremendous loyalty to that place.
No, but I mean, the point is, people, I don't want to use anything as it would be a tremendous place, but just in answer to your question, I mean, for me, in...
in college, university, my job was to get money politically out of provosts and presidents and, you know, develop leverage and so forth and outmaneuver people and I was very successful.
Here there's no alumni, no faculty.
Speak to me for a second because that is almost a unique American institution, the research library.
That's right.
Founded by collectors.
Huntington, this.
Morgan, this, the Folger, the AAS.
Newbury.
There are a lot of them like this.
The Clark, yeah.
J.C.
Brown, in a way.
If they're to be really useful in the world of research and scholarship, they have to keep pace.
And unfortunately, the people they serve, the users, the academics, are not the people who support them.
So I have to go out and raise money from a dowager in San Marino.
in order to make it possible to buy books for this, you know, graduate student out here who doesn't know this person and doesn't care.
And it's a much trickier business.
And you don't have an alumni either.
That's right.
So for me, instead of outmaneuving somebody, I've got to go out and raise money.
And fortunately, there are some people around who are loyal and have resources, and that's very good.
I mean, people sit down and say how much you need, and you say, well, I need
$125,000, so let's make it $250,000.
And you're like, well, okay, why didn't I ask for $250,000 to start there?
Fine.
But, I mean, there are people who have been there, but a lot of that has to happen.
And so one of the big problems is to keep things going and developing it upward at the same time and hope that we can get the resources to really make the place as good in its performance as it is in this collection.
Its collections are fabulous.
It really doesn't have to add when you think about it.
I mean, you get targets of opportunities, certainly, but... You have to, if you just became frozen in amber, I mean, a lot of the collections that are so rich and support all those people who were there in that special reading room were acquired in the past 15, 20, 25 years.
Now, some of them are, in fact, old.
Some of them go back.
And it's amazing how much vitality there is in some of those rich collections.
But you have to keep going, and you also have to keep relevant.
If the only thing that you...
You had where British and American documents before, say, 1914, 1860, after a while you'd become less and less relevant.
So we have to continue to develop in the field of history of science.
We have all the papers of Hubble and so forth, history of astrophysics, early astrophysics.
We're the premier place in the country for the frontier, for the American West,
for the history of California, for the history of Los Angeles, all those kinds of things.
We have to continue to develop and have materials that people are really going to find useful.
So, yeah, you have to continue to grow.
If you don't grow, you really are dead, in every respect.
And all you have to do is just run projections out, you know, far enough in the future, and you can just simply see it coming less and less relevant.
Unfortunately, we are so unique, and we're in the, you know, in one of the great expanding, developing parts of, well, nobody will duplicate what we do.
Nobody will ever again build a Huntington Library.
So we've got something to build on, clearly, and something to develop, and something to preserve and enhance.
We don't have to start from scratch.
But we do have to do something.
We have to rejuvenate.
If you don't grow, if you don't renew, you really do atrophy.
And that can happen to anybody.
I mean, say, though we will ever again build a Huntington Library, you mean anything beautiful?
Obviously not what you have, but you think the great independent research library that is built on the collection of an individual is pretty much over?
Yeah, I do, and that's a considered opinion.
There are still people who will build up great collections out of eccentricity or need or whatever else.
Most of the great collections will have come from that way.
either from their obsession or from the need to collect information, will have a nice, sizable collection of 10,000, maybe 15,000, 20,000 volumes.
But nobody's going to have the huge collections of rare books or they don't exist.
Nobody's got them that we know of now.
Huntington-Brock Hole Libraries, Church Collection, Ellesmere, Bridgewater Collection, all those other things.
The Stowe Papers,
Nobody that we know of has that kind of money anymore.
You not only have to, and the expectations of a library are great.
You don't just buy it and display it.
You're going to have to house it.
You're going to have to make it available to scholars.
You have to protect it.
You have to preserve it.
You have to have environmental controls.
You've got to publish.
You've got to do all this.
Well, the chances are that rather than start from scratch, and there's a guy, there are a few guys who are attempting to do that right now, by the way,
So it couldn't let you do?
Yeah.
There's a guy in Santa Barbara.
Dave Karpels.
We interviewed him last year.
I just wanted to see if that's who you were going to name him.
Karpels is the case.
He's doomed.
There's absolutely no way that will survive because he doesn't have the money to make it survive.
He claims, what did he say?
He's got it all figured.
Mathematician.
He figures in 100 years he's going to have more money than the Getty.
But he's wrong because he's not going to be around 100 years to supervise it and it's not going to happen.
And I think it's very unlikely that they'll happen.
What will happen is that these collections will become major wings or parts of the collection.
Who has one million manuscripts?
What will become of those one million manuscripts?
I don't know.
And depending on how he... I hope they're treated well in the meantime because in some places there's going to be a lawsuit, there's going to be a family fight, there's going to be a will challenged, a trust broken.
Who knows?
There'll be something awful.
You know the similar case of the
the art collector, I can't remember his name in Philadelphia, who put together that fabulous collection.
Blessing Rosenwald?
No.
I forget which one it's called, and it was open maybe, by appointment only occasionally, and he had it.
He had a fabulous collection of old masters and so forth.
And then he laid down these very eccentric rules.
He died, and I was sort of a trust.
They can't operate because there's no income.
And the only good income is to open it up.
If you open it up, there are other costs.
What they want to do is even sell off a few things in order to build up an endowment so they will pay for the operation.
According to the trust, you can't do that.
And so, basically, they'll have to close the thing and just keep it there until somebody, unless they can move it under the aegis of some university or some museum or something.
But that is just not going to happen.
It's just not going to go.
These things may go temporary, but they're not going to be able to survive.
Look at Armand Hammer's art museum.
It's not going to last.
It's a joke.
Well, who's the guy that just gave everything to the Met now?
Walt Annenberg, who is just over the mountains.
You've got Norton Simon, who has a museum here, but he won't stay here.
He'll sell it.
It'll either go to some museum, or it'll become part of somebody's estate, and they'll auction it off.
books I don't I don't think it's likely that it just doesn't seem like that you would have anybody who could have a big enough collection that they could not only create over you know something worthy of research and something really rich they have to buy several libraries like you couldn't just do it and
then to run it as an institution, I think it has to be under somebody's umbrella.
And so I think they'll go to, they'll either be dispersed or they'll have to go to all institutions.
Or something like a Clements Library or, you know, or Scheide's Library, which is tight, 5,000 items, that's on Princeton, and presumably it will go on Princeton.
Oh, sure.
I don't know, because they're the ones who can provide the kind of context for it and the administrative costs and so forth.
So, no, I don't expect to see it happen.
But we certainly do owe a debt to the collectors, don't we?
Oh, I think so.
I think we do.
I mean, that's one of my occasional speech topics is the relationship between collectors and scholarship.
And the fact that, in many cases, the collectors may be sort of superficial as scholars.
I mean, they really are obsessed with maybe just
getting all of a certain thing.
But ultimately, the act of their collecting brings together the nucleus of a research collection.
And so scholars ultimately benefit.
I guess I wrote a little booklet, or an empty little booklet, which I should send you, which has a couple of essays along that line.
That would be nice.
That would be really nice.
That's kind of one of the major themes of the book.
It's called Speaking of Books.
And it's just a
if you don't think of it i'll remind of it i'll try to get you a copy i'm sure i'll just simply have you have your all your cards with me and i'll ask my secretary overland just to make sure you send a copy of that i don't think i have any here because i've got to get this you've given us so wonderful is there anything that uh
I feel as funny that... Well, don't hesitate to ever... I don't think I can be very helpful except for somebody to bounce ideas off of, but particularly for this topic.
But I'm delighted that you're doing this.
I mean, I think there are a lot of people who've